me++ notes

CHAPTER 1 : BOUNDARIES/NETWORKS

BOUNDARIES

CONNECTIONS
as Georg Simmel observed, a “connecting creature who must always separate and who cannot connect without separating.”4 My enclosures are leaky. Crossing the various boundaries that surround me there are paths, pipes, wires, and other channels that spatially concentrate inflows and outflows of people, other living creatures, discrete goods, gases and fluids, energy, information, and money.

Through the interaction of our efforts to effect and control transfers among enclosures and our competition for network resources, we mutually construct and constrain one another’s realms of daily action. Within the relatively stable framework of our interconnecting, overlapping, sometimes shared transfer networks, our intricately interwoven demands and responses create fluctuating conditions of freedom and constraint.

NETWORKS
Today the network, rather than the enclosure,
is emerging as the desired and contested object: the dual now
dominates.6 Extension and entanglement trump enclosure and autonomy.
Control of territory means little unless you also control the
channel capacity and access points that service it.

CLOCKS
They not only mark time, they trigger the execution of instructions and programs. Seconds, milliseconds, microseconds, nanoseconds, picoseconds: the electronic global heartbeat keeps quickening and gathering power

PROCESSES
The practice of timesharing has produced a further elision. If a processor is fast enough, it can be programmed to divide its time among multiple simultaneous processes—providing the illusion that it is devoting itself exclusively to each one. In effect, a single, sequential processor divides itself into multiple “virtual machines” that seem to occupy the same space and time.

The more we interrelate events and processes across space, the more simultaneity dominates succession; time no longer presents itself as one damn thing after another, but as a structure of multiple, parallel, sometimes cross-connected and interwoven, spatially distributed processes that cascade around the world through networks. Once there was a time and a place for everything; today, things are increasingly smeared across multiple sites and moments in complex and often indeterminate ways.

DISCONTINUITIES
In the fast-paced, digitally mediated world that we have constructed for ourselves, what exists between 0 and 1, a pixel and its neighbor, or a discrete time interval and the next? The answer, of course, is nothing—profoundly nothing; there’s no there there. The digital world is logically, spatially, and temporally discontinuous. 

The discontinuities produced by networks result from the drive for efficiency, safety, and security. Engineers want to limit the number of access points and provide fast, uninterrupted transfers among these points. So you can drink from a stream anywhere along its length, but you can only access piped water at a faucet.

You experience the architectural transitions between floors of a building when you climb the stairs, but you go into architectural limbo between the opening and closing of the doors when you use the elevator.

HABITATS
We have, as we all know, instant anywhere, as we enjoy our capacity to make immediate electronic contact with people anywhere on the face of the globe. . . . Our new places, that is, are given form with electronic, not visual glue. 

COMMUNITIES
Today, they are maintained through a complex mix of local face-to-face interactions, travel, mail systems, synchronous electronic contact through telephones and video links, and asynchronous electronic contact through email and similar media. 

The constants in my world are no longer provided by a contiguous home turf: increasingly, my sense of continuity and belonging derives from being 
electronically networked to the widely scattered people and places I care about.




CHAPTER 2 : CONNECTING CREATURES

Embedded within a vast structure of nested boundaries and ramifying networks, my muscular and skeletal, physiological, and nervous systems have been artificially augmented and expanded. My reach extends indefinitely and interacts with the similarly extended reaches of others to produce a global system of transfer, actuation, sensing, and control.

LIMBS (EXTENDED)
I become a squishy control node in an extensive and highly integrated machine network.

Through electronic storage and distribution of my encoded commands—particularly by means of digital networks—I can indefinitely multiply and distribute my points of physical agency through space and time.

FLOWS (CHANNELED)
Unfortunately, the fleshware connection can be flaky, unstable, and nonstandard (worse than a dial-up modem), but there are numerous illustrated manuals describing recommended configurations and protocols. 

What it missed— dooming its brightly colored, hard-edged images of Capsule Homes, Plug-in Cities, Instant Cities, Cushicles, Suitaloons, Manzaks, Rokplugs and Logplugs to seem closer, now, to Jules Verne than to William Gibson or Neal Stephenson—was the emerging role of hyperminiaturization, wirelessness, digitization, and dematerialization.

SENSORIUM (AUGMENTED)
With these pervasive audio and video sensing systems, the lines dividing electronic conversation, accidental overhearing, deliberate electronic eavesdropping, and systematic surveillance are thin ones— more a matter of context and intention than of technology. As  wireless bandwidth increases, as the video equivalents of cellphones emerge, and as sound and image capture points proliferate, the balance is inexorably shifting toward surveillance.

In general, any self-contained device that detects a property and produces a signal is a sensor that I can connect to a network and use to extend my powers of observation and surveillance. 

GAZE(UNRESTRICTED)
Although Foucault wrote before the digital revolution exploded, he knew in his bones what was coming; jails could morph from enclosures to networks, and in their characteristic postmodern form they could be larger and more totalizing than anything Bentham might have imagined.

SPACE (DE-PRIVATIZED)
Under these conditions, the traditional distinctions between a city’s public and private spaces are eroding.

The shift from naked eyeballs to networked video also changes the rules of public space layout. As the urban theorist Camillo Sitte observed, the winding streets and odd-shaped plazas of medieval cities continually provided visual surprises—not to mention opportunities for unexpected encounters and ambushes. 

Once, the natural condition of cities was opacity; architects created limited transparency by means of door and window openings, enfilades, open rooms, and public spaces. Today, the default condition is electronic transparency, and you have to work hard to produce limited zones of privacy.

NERVOUS SYSTEM (DE-LOCALIZED)
My augmented nervous system, like that of the D.C. police, has immeasurably transcended the disposition of my flesh.31 It has extended itself electronically by means of copper wires, fiber-optic cables, and wireless channels that connect my brain to electronic memory, processing points, sensors, and actuators distributed throughout the world and even in outer space.

So my sensorium is no longer localized by the inexorable laws of visual occlusion and acoustic decay, the range of my exploring fingertips, and the wavelengths and scales to which evolution has tuned my original sensory equipment. It reaches to wherever there are sensors with network connections.

With the continued shift from enclosures to networks, we have bolted beyond modernity’s spatial and temporal extensions to a condition of global hyperconnectivity. 

CONTROL (DISTRIBUTED)
In many contexts, form follows feedback. It is now a commonplace of control theory that swarms of bees, schools of fish, and flocks of birds are held together by short-range feedback loops. Slime mold cells follow pheromone gradients to aggregate, and to respond to global changes in their environment, at even smaller scale. These collectives are self-organizing; they don’t need leaders.

When social scientists first embraced the concept of feedback, they often thought in terms of homeostasis—of closed social groups regulated by negative feedback loops and seeking stable states, as a thermostat-controlled heating system seeks a stable temperature: community as a blob of slime mold. But that is not the way it has worked out in the network era. 

Rather, they engage me (with varying degrees of commitment) with multiple, scattered, perhaps spatially indefinite, and maybe transitory social and economic structures. And they implicate me with innumerable, simultaneous, spatially overlaid patterns of self-organization in complex, unstable geographies and choreographies of control. 

MIND (MULTIPLIED)
My local stock of neurons has (the neuroscientists gloomily assure me) been diminishing as I grow older, but the supply of silicon and software at my disposal has been growing rapidly. 

As nodes of machine intelligence are distributed just about everywhere, as electronic interconnectivity grows, and as electronic feedback loops multiply, cities are evolving into extended minds and biological brains are becoming elements of larger cognitive systems.

Bateson himself put it: “Within Mind in the widest sense there will be a hierarchy of subsystems, any one of which we can call an individual mind.” 

In all of these cases the extended body functions as a system for perceiving one’s environment in particular ways, reasoning about it, and executing actions that engage it. 

But skulls and skins do not bound mental systems, and through computer networking these systems can now extend indefinitely. 

MEMORY (EVOLVING)
Extracranial memories once consisted of records clustered within easy reach, like the papers on my desktop or the notes and pictures on my refrigerator door, but they are evolving into global, selforganizing networks. 

Furthermore, as physicists are increasingly insisting, there is also no straightforward distinction between computational processes and physical processes in general; you can think of any physical process as the computation of some function. 

INDIVIDUALS (INDEFINITE)
As Bateson had begun to realize, we are not fully contained within our skins; our extended networks and fragmented habitats make us spatially and temporally indefinite entities.

I construct, and I am constructed, in a mutually recursive process that continually engages my fluid, permeable boundaries and my endlessly ramifying networks. I am a spatially extended cyborg. 



EPILOGUE
For such nomads, the most basic and obvious ethical principle—and one crucial to social cohesion—must have been that of reciprocity: take responsibility for the welfare of others in the group because you expect them to do the same for you.

NETWORKS OF RECIPROCITY
You had many obligations to those with whom you interacted intensely, over extended periods, but fewer to those with whom your interactions were limited or blocked by the impedance (some would say the tyranny) of distance.  

And the argument that native Tasmanians had “little affinity to ourselves” was being used by European settlers to justify their extermination. Change the material basis of ethical principles—in particular, technologies of interconnection and networking—and the consequences may be momentous. 

SCALING COMMUNITY
Both Plato and Aristotle argued that the social glue breaks down at the point where citizens become strangers to one another, so communities should not scale up beyond that. 

Cities are not just larger than villages: they are materially, socially, and ethically different. 

Through the close proximities they establish, through shared use of public space, through common dependence upon complex and vulnerable infrastructure, and through joint access to vital networks of limited capacity, the world’s great cities have become zones of dense, inescapable interdependencies among their citizens—most of whom know very little of one another.

It is not that cities are domains free of difference and conflict: rather, they rely upon the capacities of their highly evolved cultures and institutions—of ballot boxes, legal systems, markets, civil society, critical discourse, and political activism—to domesticate hostility, to constructively manage differences and conflicts, and indeed to generate creative energy from them. ... to allow large numbers of people, who do not necessarily know one another, to get along. 

ELECTRONICALLY EXPANDING CIRCLES
Subjects, extended bodies, settlements, economies, and cultures can no longer effectively be separated by skins, walls, and frontiers. 

Mobility and interconnectivity on massive scales scramble the neat units and hierarchies described by Henry Sidgwick. Our circles of interaction and mutual obligation cannot be limited to our campsites, immediate neighborhoods, cities, nationstates, or even networks of international trading partners; they are truly and inescapably global.
 
But, as Marx repeatedly argued, humankind never, in the end, rejects more effective means to satisfy its material needs. Few of us will choose to give up our instruments of liberation from what he might have called (had he lived to see it) the idiocy of unconnected life—the narrowly constrained existence imposed by limits of locality, time, memory, and processing power. 

If we are to reap the benefits of our electronically expanded social, economic, and cultural circles without succumbing to their dangers, we must recognize that they actualize our common humanity.

GLIMPSING THE GLOBAL POLIS

ETHICAL INTERCONNECTIVITY
the ancient principle of reciprocity applied in new spatial patterns and on unprecedented scales—networks of ethical interconnectivity that allow scattered, disparate strangers, in vast numbers, to get along peacefully and productively. 

they will be spatially discontinuous, overlapping and intersecting, and messily asynchronous in their patterns of daily activity. And they will be defined not by circles of warmth, not by surrounding stone fortifications, nor even by the borders and boundaries drawn on today’s political maps, but by the endless hum of electromagnetic vibrations. 













